---
title: 'The Foley Catheter'
date: 2024-07-14
permalink: /posts/the-foley-catheter/
tags:
  - fiction
  - shortstory
---

I wrote this story for a short story course at Hokkaido University in Spring 2024. I'm rather proud of it, as it evoked a fair bit of emotional response from my test readers. There are a few narrative mishaps (I won't spoil them for you here), but after fixing those I do hope to get this published in a literary journal. I'll have to change the title first, though, as it fits the vibes but doesn't quite match the contents.

The Foley Catheter
======
Or the Unfortunate Circumstances of One Elias Barkley
-----

In 2007, when Elias Barkley began his senior year of Tufts medical school, he rewarded himself with the iPhone. Not an iPhone, like an iPhone XR or an iPhone 12 Pro, but the iPhone, first of her name, that many others would follow in the years to come. By then, his laptop (a 2004 PowerBook) had long since turned from an academic toolkit into a portal to worlds of entertainment. With a smartphone, Elias didn't even try to put up a facade of practicality.

The iPhone was born to serve his every whim. It existed so that he wouldn't have a dull moment in a grocery store queue, so he could fill his sleepless nights giggling at the extensively complex ASCII art he and the few university friends who also got smartphones texted one another. Often, he would send the last message of the night, everyone else already asleep, while he crafted a novel combination of slashes, hyphens and brackets.

Back when Elias began his undergraduate studies in the first class of the new millennium, he had kept a copy of Nettler's legendary Atlas of Human Anatomy on his nightstand. When he couldn't fall asleep, it used to hop down onto his bed, stroke his cheek with a soft, wax-like page, and cuddle him to sleep. In the later years he replaced the book with the PowerBook, which had a more up-to-date online index of anatomy, but it wasn't as gentle. When the laptop jumped on his bed, it did so with a demand, and often bit his face between its keyboard and screen until he pulled it tight against his chest. Elias often woke up covered in bruises.

Unlike the book and the laptop, the phone didn't need to follow him to bed since he always took it with him. Especially in their first weeks together, Elias tended to fall asleep holding his phone and wake up after dropping it on his face, then place it on the side of his pillow. He barely noticed that the phone never stroked his cheek like the book used to, or begged for his embrace like the laptop. It took him for its own the moment they met.

Nearing the end of his final year, he had a major exam on the digestive system that he really needed to score high on for his specialisation studies. The topic was no problem – more than anything, Elias was interested in the things that went in and came out of the gastrointestinal tract when they weren't supposed to. Recently, he'd been enthralled by one professor's story of treating a middle-aged man who'd had a children's toy car – a purple 1977 Ford Maverick with a rather bulky rear spoiler, to be exact – exactly 9.7 centimetres deep in his anus, almost all the way up to the curve of the sigmoid colon. It had to be removed with open surgery.

More than once, Elias had re-checked the length of the human rectum in the book (between 12 and 15 centimetres, starting from the anal canal and continuing into the colon, that could be as long as 313 centimetres). He wondered if somewhere in the world there was a Maverick that had ridden the whole highway.

Mr. Maverick wasn't a once-in-a-career patient either. Others' insides had revealed foodstuffs as big as apples, intricate Christmas decorations, and various household items such as toothbrushes, deodorants and knives. In Massachusetts, where Elias lived, there were around a hundred cases every year, and more than 4000 in the States as a whole. And this was just the ones that got reported and diagnosed.

The exam was only held once a year, so if he didn't pass, he'd have to repeat a full year, and with his busy nightlife of texting, ASCII art and phone-cuddling, he had a fair bit of trouble sleeping. To play it safe, he bargained for some prescription sleeping pills from a dormitory neighbour and measured a dose that would give him around eight hours. He fell asleep in minutes, without even glancing at his phone.

He fell asleep a few minutes before ten and woke up at twenty past six. His alarm was set for eight just in case, but Elias was feeling more rejuvenated than ever in his graduate years and got up early. The only hitch was that he was a bit constipated, but figured it was just his nerves acting up before the exam, and resolved to prepare breakfast.

Only after finishing his porridge and bread at around seven did Elias realise he hadn't checked his messages. He reached for the phone on his bed but didn't find it at the usual place next to the pillow. He looked around his small dormitory room – on the desk, under the bed, amongst the tangled sheets – but gave up to counter the rising sense of panic in his throat.
– I'll find it when the alarm rings, he told himself, and resigned to a final review of his exam notes.

As he ploughed through the pages, minutes seemed to slow down. By seven thirty, he found himself checking the time from the clock on the wall every two minutes. If he forced his eyes to stay on the page for longer, the words seemed to scamper off the notebook and hide in a far-off corner of his room. By seven forty-five, he was checking the time every minute.

At ten to eight, Elias gave up on the notes. He stared at the clock, mentally forcing the hands to move faster. They seemed to slow down even more just to spite him.

At eight to eight, he had re-checked his trousers pockets thrice. At five to eight, he was pacing around the room. It only took five steps in one direction, even when he stopped to check his coat pockets and bookshelf on the way. He rummaged his desk once more and threw the sheets out of his bed.

At minute to eight, Elias was pacing in place, counting seconds.
– I wonder if my phone is in sync with the clock, he thought.  – Perhaps it's even early.

The hands moved to eight and twelve with a dissatisfying tick.

Elias stood still for ten, fifteen seconds before collapsing on the filthy full-floor carpet.
– It's not here, he mumbled. – Someone must have stolen it. It was that skunk in 314, wasn't it. That's why he gave me the sleeping pills, so he could sneak in!

In the back of his head, he knew he wasn’t making any sense, but figured he'd go ask just in case, and sprang to the door. As he grabbed the handle, he felt the smallest vibration near his waistline.

– Somewhere in the stomach, he thought – Or no, more like the lower back. In between? Probably the large intestine. Ah, there it goes again, quite low actually, so that would have to be at the farther end of the- yeah, the rectum. That explains the constipation.

Elias' mind hopped the hoops of analysis before he could decide if he wanted to follow through at all. Then he heard the alarm.

Beep-beep. Beep-beep. Beep-beep.

The sound was deeper than usual, more muffled than piercing.

Elias had an odd feeling, like he was standing in the middle of a dark highway, watching a truck's headlights appear out of nowhere. Impending sense of doom, he thought, that's what they called it in the lectures. It gave him the good sense to jump on his bed and bury his face in the pillow just in time before the pain told him to start screaming.

He felt something moving inside, the vibrations resonating all around his body. They turned into something like spasms, and the pain was remarkable. Elias pushed his face against the pillow as hard as he could, gripping the steel bed frames with his hands.

One painful beep after another, the alarm got louder and louder, its crescendo reaching climax after two minutes. Then there was quiet.

The pain was significant, but the humiliation was worse.

– Mr. Maverick must have been out of his mind, he thought. – I'd rather experience perforation-related death than admit this to a colleague.

Elias checked the clock. The automatic snooze alarm would start again and again with five-minute intervals until he managed to turn it off. He’d rather get the whole thing out before the next round.

He got on his feet and swayed to the hallway. There was a janitor's cabinet in the bathroom, from where he retrieved a pair of surgical gloves used when cleaning the pipes. Back in his room, he enjoyed a chef's selection of quick-fix painkillers.

In principle, there are three ways to remove a foreign object from the rectum. The least invasive one is local anaesthesia to the buttocks, which relaxes them, helping the doctor's hand to slip in and the object to slip out. Elias didn't have access to anaesthesia, apart from simulating the effects with large quantities of alcohol, which would render him useless for the rest of the operation. The extreme option of surgery was out of the question as well.

That left the physical removal of the foreign object using a variety of delicate instruments, such as tongs, clamps and scissors. With them came the danger of piercing the intestine and causing its contents to flow to a part of the body where they didn't belong, which would, under these circumstances, result in a shameful death. You'd have to use an endoscope to locate the object and see what you're doing. A more sophisticated tool would be this very handy, made-for-purpose stick with a cup at the end, sort of like an elegant soup ladle, that was inserted in the cavity and directed behind the object, which would then be caught in the ladle and pulled out. You could also use a Foley catheter, which had a nice little inflatable balloon at the end to act as the ladle.

Not having access to any of these, Elias was left with the one tool that every doctor could rely on. He put the rubber glove on his right hand and rubbed it with shaving cream for make-do lubrication. He hoped the painkillers would kick in soon.

It was only a minute until the next alarm, so he lay down on the bed and shoved his face in the pillow. As the vibrations began, and turned into spasms, he tried to focus on his breathing. It didn't do much.

When the trembling subsided, Elias took off his trousers and got on his back on the floor, pulling his knees all the way to his elbows. He then reached his gloved right hand between his pulled-up legs and stretched his buttocks open with his left hand to allow his right hand access.

For final encouragement, and to muffle out any disturbing noises, he kicked the play button on his CD player. Led Zeppelin's Mothership album came out, and to the rhythm of the guitar-and-drum intro, Elias inserted two fingers in his anus.

*In the days of my youth, I was told what it means to be a man, Zeppelin sang.*
*Now I've reached that age, I've tried to do all those things the best I can.*
*No matter how I try, I find my way into the same old jam.*

For the first few seconds, he tried not to think about what he was doing. That turned out to be impossible, so he tried to focus on the analytical thinking of a practitioner that his studies had honed for years.

His heart was beating double-time, his whole body rigid. I’ll have to calm myself down, he thought.

Elias began talking out loud. Like with any patient.

– There you go, Mr. Barkley, the hard part's over. This won't take long. I'll just need you to relax with me, okay? Keep those legs loose, take a deep breath. There you go.

Mr. Barkley gasped as Dr. Barkley pushed in the rest of his fingers, halfway up the palm.

– That's all right, Mr. Barkley, the doctor said. – We're almost there. This'll be over and done with soon and you'll just have a laugh about it.

Just then, the tip of his middle finger touched something that wasn't a part of Mr. Barkley's anus.

– Okay, I've got the foreign object now. Right after the end of the canalis analis, well tucked within the rectum.

Elias imagined an assisting nurse just outside his field of view, taking notes behind a clipboard. Straight out of school, he imagined, the nurse was blushing, trying hard not to show. Elias felt a surge of encouragement. He'd show the nurse how it was done.

Zeppelin was singing about having his share of good and bad times. Dr. Barkley breathed in deep and told his patient every doctor's favourite lie.
– I'll have to reach in just a bit farther to see if we can't get it out. This won't hurt much.

Mr. Barkley was desperate to believe him.

He gasped as he pushed his hand just two, three centimetres farther, the head line on his palm disappearing inside, and clipped the phone between his index and middle fingers.

– Hang in there, Mr. Barkley! I've got it now; I'll just need to go a little bit father-
– No, no way! Mr. Barkley cut Dr. Barkley off. – You're gonna rip my ass in half!
Dr. Barkley felt the muscles around his hand contracting.
– All right there, Mr. Barkley. I won't go farther. Just keep relaxed for a bit more and I'll get my hand out, so we can go and figure out something else.

Mr. Barkley knew he was lying and tried not to.

Then the vibrations started.

The phone moved, the doctor pulled, Elias screamed out loud. His rectum was burning, the phone lying in a pile of blood and excrement on the full carpet, the smell like a bucket of month-old yoghurt topped with a dead squirrel. Vomit rose up his throat and he let it come. The doctor and nurse were gone. Elias was alone.

The alarm blared, and Elias felt his colon resonate with the vibrations, all the way up to his chest.

*Beep-beep! Beep-beep! Beep-beep!*

Gagging and retching, he curled into a ball. As he watched the phone move on the floor, the alarm vibration bringing it closer and closer, he knew with utmost certainty that like with the book stroking his cheek night after night and the laptop forcing its way against his chest, this would not be the last time. He would wake up with the hint of constipation again and again, pull the phone out morning after morning, until he gave in.

Zeppelin moved to the outro, and, for a moment, matched rhythms with the alarm's beeping crescendo.

*I'm gonna love you each and every day*
*You can feel the beat within my heart*
*Realize, sweet babe, we ain't never gonna part-*

The final phrase was drowned out by the alarm.

